Method development in artistic research: approaches to the subjective, the experimental, the academic and the art world 

As stated in the introduction, in Sweden a large number of artistic PhD projects have been produced and many are currently under production.[9] If we include Finland, Norway, UK, Belgium and the Netherlands we can easily see that there is no shortage of examples of artistic research projects, but where has the method development been situated in this period when the discipline has become established, in academia or the surrounding art world? How has the important relation between theory and practice been dealt with? These questions are clearly related to each other, and in order to continue a strong and healthy development of the field of artistic research there is a need to study and develop the practical as well as theoretical implementation and assessment of the advancement of these issues. We are convinced that the method development must be situated also in the art world and not merely within academia. Also, as we suggest above, the ways in which dynamic forms of documentation can contribute to the development of methods for artistic research can be seen as a further link between the specific interests of the academic institutions, the artist and the art world. 

In order to address these issues we will turn to an overview of some of the artistic research that we have been engaged in during the past 14 years, looking specifically at the relation between theory, analysis and artistic practice in these projects. While a broader overview of artistic research practices in Europe indeed would be called for, the purpose of the present text is also to consider the relation between artistic practice and research from a subjective viewpoint. Hence, we will have to restrain the overview to works in which we have ourselves been involved as artists. Several of these projects have featured a strong element of method development in different areas: Music and movement engages a social and political element as a means to reflect on the artistic practice. Interdisciplinarity is an essential element in Integra as well as in Music in Movement: The former approaching human sciences in music psychology and the latter combines scientifically oriented music technology in close collaboration with artistic practices. The study of interactions between musicians is at the heart of many of the projects either with the focus on improvising musicians in different cultures, such as in (Re)thinking improvisation or in collaborations between composers and performers. What we find most pertinent to the present inquiry in this overview is whether one can identify a clear interaction between artistic production and the various research methodologies. 
Repetition Repeats all other Repetitions
Repetition Repeats all other Repetitions is an open form composition for 10-stringed guitar and electronics by Henrik Frisk.[10] The piece emerged out of a collaboration between the two of us, a project in which interaction in the widest sense was allowed to play a principal part already at the outset. As a research project, it focussed on early stages of interaction between composer and performer and was part of our respective PhD-projects. The preparatory work on the piece involved an extended artistic research process that included an analysis of video documentation from Stefan’s collaboration with another Swedish composer. For this purpose, we developed a method for analyzing the composer-performer interaction.  Before starting work on the piece itself the results of that study, as well as the method itself, provided topic for several papers and conference presentations (Frisk & Östersjö, 2006; 2007). During this period, the casual discussions of how the new piece might take shape were also significant, some of which were also documented. The resulting work employed a radically open form in which the collaborative interactions between composer and performer were situated at the centre of the practice.
 
Henceforth three different versions have been produced: in the first two, the structure was settled prior to the performance, and for the third version the choices were made interactively in real time. The preparatory work also involved improvisation sessions that were recorded on audio and video and later transcribed by Henrik to become part of the score. In the process that followed the first performance in Beijing in 2006 several initiatives were taken to force the development of the piece in a different direction. Some of the work in this process is clearly leaning towards more research oriented activities and some of the work quite naturally belong to the artistic process. In practice, however, it is very difficult to discriminate between research and the artistic practice. Repetition repeats all other Repetitions is an example of how artistic research can resonate in the artistic work and output, as well as how specifically artistic and aesthetic concepts may fuel the research and force it into unforeseen areas (Frisk, 2008; Östersjö 2008).
(Re)thinking Improvisation
(Re)thinking Improvisation was an international artistic research project on improvisation in different cultures, in which we both took part, that ran between 2009 and 2012. The project brought up several of the themes discussed in this article; notably the subjectivity of the research, the political and social spheres in artistic research as well as method development. In its early stages, there was an outspoken wish among some of the members of the group to more radically investigate the role of the researcher, both as performer and as writer. Within the group The Six Tones we furthered our engagement in an intercultural interaction on equal terms involving more musicians from different aesthetic traditions in Hanoi. 

The project culminated in a festival and conference in November-December 2011 at Inter Arts Center in Malmö. This event hosted performers and researchers from three different continents and consisted of 19 public performances and seven lab-sessions in which both conceptual and non-conceptual approaches to improvisation were presented and discussed. For us, the strongest contribution from the research methodologies used was how already ongoing intercultural work was radicalized by the global and postcolonial perspective we adopted. The research combined qualitative research methods with philosophical writing inspired from cultural studies. A publication with CDs, a DVD and an edited book is forthcoming during 2013.
Music in Movement
In a study on the German composer Rolf Riehm’s Toccata Orpheus (Riehm, 1990) for guitar solo, Stefan Östersjö identified an original approach to musical composition and performance. The bodily action of the performer is treated as an intentional compositional parameter in a way that makes an unusual kind of theatricality of the performance emerge as a result of the composed structure. In his analysis, Östersjö argued that the expressive units in the piece cannot be analysed merely as sonic events but that they are better understood as gestural-sonorous objects (Godøy, 2006; Östersjö, 2008). The further artistic quest, that emerged from the interpretation of the score, resulted in the making of several installation works - all drawing on material from the guitar piece - as well as artistic projects developing the concept of musical composition as the organization of gestural sonorous objects. This continued development has resulted in Music in Movement - an ongoing international artistic research project funded by the Swedish Research Council. This project is also clearly multi-disciplinary in terms of analytical methodologies (involving gesture researchers from musicology, linguistics and semiotics and both qualitative and quantitative data) and from an artistic viewpoint by exploring ways of merging the practices of choreography and musical composition. The terminology for, and analytical understanding of, musical gesture are in rapid development, and the major challenge appears to be the question of how to bring multiple perspectives together, like the 1st, 2nd and 3rd person perspectives (Leman 2010) as well as data ranging from autoethnography to motion tracking.
 
A recent premiere took place in October 2012 at the Cheo Theatre in Hanoi with a new installation and performance work titled Inside/Outside: a collaborative composition by the Vietnamese/Swedish group The Six Tones, the Swedish choreographer Marie Fahlin and the British laptop improviser Matt Wright. Based on a concept by Nguyen Thanh Thuy of The Six Tones, the piece wishes to discuss traditional Vietnamese music of today from a gender perspective, building on an analysis of gesture in the performance of traditional Vietnamese music in TV-shows. In the piece, dressed in traditional Vietnamese queen costumes, the three musicians of The Six Tones make a choreographed performance in glass boxes as if exhibited in a museum.[11] The way the series of works in Music in Movement are taking shape it seems it might become the most conceptually novel and explicitly political project that we have been involved in so far, taking a more decisive grip of issues concerning migration, identity and gender.
Collaborative creativity and contemporary performance practice
Since 2002, Stefan Östersjö has been involved in a series of projects that address the interaction between performer and composer. He started out with the PhD project SHUT UP ‘N’ PLAY! (Östersjö, 2008), a study concerned with contemporary performance practices and specifically how these practices are created and transmitted in the interaction between composer and performer. Adding qualitative analysis of the social play between the parties the research methodology became the starting point for new projects explorating the possible dynamics of the relations between composer and performer further. A current example of this is the ongoing study within the CMPCP-project[12] in which the London-based composer David Gorton and Östersjö are carrying out a longitudinal study in collaboration with the music psychologist Eric Clarke within the frame of Clarke’s project titled “Creative Practice in Contemporary Concert Music”. This study constitutes an attempt to situate artistic research in a broader analytical frame in which the two participating artistic researchers make an independent analysis of their work which is eventually complemented with an analysis by Eric Clarke and his assistant as external observers. The usefulness of carrying out this work in the form of artistic research can be identified in two main fields: artistic development - sparked and enforced by the analysis of the interaction - and the need for documentation and analytical understandings of these emerging contemporary performance practices.
Integra
Integra was a pan-European inter-disciplinary project that approached specific artistic needs in music technology engaging programmers, theorists, music technology experts, musicians and composers that engaged in methods for increasing sustainability in the electronic music world. The research and development process for the IntegraLive software was conducted under the auspices of Integra, a 3 year EU-funded project led by Birmingham Conservatoire, following another 3-year EU-funded project, both supported by the Culture programme of the European Commission.  One of the main goals of Integra was to develop a new software environment for the composition and performance of live electronic music that would facilitate the process for new music ensembles and chamber groups to play music with live electronics (Frisk & Bullock, 2011; Frisk, Bullock & Coccioli, 2008). 
 
Even though Integra was not an artistic research project as such, it was to a large extent governed by some of the same principles, and it is an example of the potential power of artistic knowledge production and the ways in which it can inform neighbouring fields. Methodologically it used artistic knowledge and experience to guide the development of tools, the output of which would similarly be in the artistic domain, even if the tools themselves were constructed in a more scientifically oriented music technology context. Furthermore, Integra was a conscious attempt at dismantling the long standing, patriarchal and hierarchical structures in much electro-acoustic music by moving the artistic initiative from the studios and its technicians to the musicians performing the music.
