

The subject of `blending'---perhaps a more appropriate term is `sonic interaction'---

One of the fundamental reasons to get involved with interactive music is 

A dynamic relation between the acoustic sound source and its performer and the electronic instruments may be seen as one important conditions for achieving a textural blend, or sonic interaction, between the sounds (if and when this is desired). Temporal alignment is certainly one aspect of it but also expectation and the performer's sensation of influence over the electronic part. In the last version of Repetition discussed here we are playing with these concepts letting Stefan control the temporal alignment but not the content. Hence, it is much up to Stefan to adopt to the content chosen by the computer. The interaction is distributed to a range of parameters and may be said to be two-way, although in different modes. What then is this interaction? 

That question is clearly not specific to the field of music. Or, to put it more precisely and less axiomatically, though it is not particular to music, the way interaction is dealt with in the field of music is to a large extent informed by how it is dealt with in other realms, such as the social or the technological. Inversely, any findings within the field of music made with regard to interaction may have general relevance, but may just as well be specific to music, interactive music, or even only the particular case. In other words, as with many concepts there is a terminological fluidity involved which necessitates a discussion involving several aspects of the subject matter. Below, I attempt such an undertaking, also using experiences of interaction accumulated from Drive, etherSound, timbreMap and Repetition Repeats all other Repetitions.

Interactive Music

Before we discuss the implications of interaction independently of the field of music, the conception of interactive music itself, the focal point of this book, needs to be considered. Not only is the term by itself misleading and ambiguous, in practice, as a genre, it is used to denote so many different kinds of musical activities that the question of interaction loses its meaning.

What then is interactive music? That question prompts a rhetorical defence. Is there a music that is not interactive? That does not interact with its environment and its listeners in some way? Depending on the context, commonly when the term interactive is used, it is often implied that one of the `subjects' in the interaction is a computer or some other electronic device. This holds true also for music: interactive music implies computer music which is paradoxical because, if interactive music equates with interactive computer music, that implies that computer music, without the interactive prefix, is somehow devoid of interactive elements. At the same time, any human endeavour with a computer today is referred to as human-computer interaction. That is, composing at the computer today, almost regardless of how the process is carried out, qualifies as human-computer interaction; it is by definition an interaction with the computer. For this reason, strictly speaking, computer music, i.e. non-interactive computer music, can only be music created and performed by computers alone. That is obviously not the case. Not yet. But the question that begs an answer remains: what is it that is so specifically interactive about interactive music, and in what way does its interaction(s) deviate from the way that all music is interactive? On the one hand, the inquiry can be dismissed as uninteresting and irrelevant. If interactive music is a genre identifier, asking about the significance of `interaction' is as meaningful as questioning what is `dead' about `death metal'. On the other hand, one may (continue to) assume that the `interactive' part of the term refers to some aspect of the construction of the music it denotes. My primary concern here, however, is not for the genre, but for the ways in which computers allow for interaction in the production of musical content.

Now, it is possible to assert that in some senses electro-acoustic music recorded onto, and played back from, a tape, CD, hard drive or similar does not fulfil the requirements of that which one would expect from something which is labelled Interactive. That is to say that the performance of the music is expected to allow for interaction in some way that the genre of fixed media music glos:electro-musElectro-acoustic music produced in a studio and played back in concert is often referred to as tape music because historically these pieces were not only stored on tape but also produced by means of cutting and splicing pieces of electromagnetic tape together. As the storage medium is now more commonly CDs or DVDs the term `fixed media music' is often used. does not fulfil. The phase of production is likely to be as interactive for that music as for any other pre-composed music and the listening phase, the listener's interaction with the music, should present no difference in kind. Be that as it may, with the delimitation of interactive activities, in addition to pressing the `play' button, which in every respect qualifies as a truly interactive action, different from but akin to musical performance, Choosing the right moment for a performance to start is equally important in instrumental and electro-acoustic performances. The exact timing can mean the difference between a great and a not so great performance and for this reason, pressing the play button on the CD player to start the playback of a fixed media piece is part of its performance and, in some limited sense, part of its interpretation. most composers play back their glos:fixed_mediafixed media pieces by performing some kind of spatialisation or live mixing. In other words, the composer, or someone else, an interpreter, is performing the work. There is even a competition organised by the Belgian research centre Musiques  Recherches in ``[l]'interpretation spatialisee des oeuvres acousmatiques''.[ 1]concours-spat Such a performance is by definition interacting with the audience, the performance space, and a number of other factors in real-time.





Repetition Repeats all other Repetitions



This collaboration with the Swedish guitarist Stefan Ostersjo is an example of a project in which at the outset interaction in the widest sense was allowed to play a major part. The process is fairly well documented in two co-written papers and it was while working with Repetition that the idea of a radically open work type, the work-in-movement, crystallised. One of the conditions that allowed for the development of this openness was the disassembly of the hierarchies attached to the roles of composer and performer. These hierarchies rest on a division of labour in the field of musical practice, and this ``split in conception between what is seen as primary [notation] and secondary [sound] aspects of musical organisation leads to a split between composer and performer, between composition and interpretation and the gradual devaluation of non-notable formations''.[35]wis96 It was a tear in the fabric on which, prior to the ``increasing domination of notation'',wis96 the practice of `musician' rested. In part this project became the beginning of the attempt to re-unite the different aspects of the `musician', necessary because the collaborative process we had set in motion was irreversible. There was no way back; it was impossible to return to producing a fixed score to be interpreted. For so many years I had tried so hard to incorporate aspects of my improvisatory activities in my composition work while the solution may instead have been the `decomposition' of the very act of producing music. By giving up compositional control and replacing it with an interactive negotiation in the form of a collaboration the process was made possible.


Considering only the musical notation of the score, the first impression may be that Repetition belongs precisely to the tradition of compositions that wis96 is criticising, a tradition where ``the score is seen as normative on the musical experience.'' The first version of the score bears evidence that, at the time, the idea of the work-in-movement had not been fully incubated. It also points, however, to the difficulty in communicating a radically open work. Given the way Repetition has developed, the written instructions (i.e. the notation) are subordinate, yet important, to the higher level structures of organisation: the interaction between, in this case, myself and Stefan has become the work identifying aspect. But neither I nor Stefan are important: if someone else picked up Repetition the interaction and negotiation itself would be the aspect to focus on. This obviously calls for a different conception of the score, an augmented score that apart from the notation also includes other kinds of instructions in other kinds of media.

Together Stefan and I have produced and performed three different versions of
this piece. The third version take account of the ideas that were developed
from the experiences of the two first versions, giving the performer a much
higher degree of freedom.

In the first version the only possible interaction between the performer and the computer is mediated through a foot pedal---whether the pedal is down or up is the only information that the computer is `listening' to. In the other direction, as a result of the pressed pedal, there is a very complex flow of different types (classes) of information that the performer is expected to respond to: visual feedback from the computer screen on stage, physical (tactile) feedback from the pedal, auditive feedback in the sounds played back on the computer, all of which influence how the performer performs the piece. In other words, something incredibly concise and limited such as the binary distinction between pressed pedal or released pedal gives rise to a plenitude of messages of other kinds. This situation---the inconsistency between input and output---was what, at the outset of this research project as a whole, as well as at the beginning of the composition process of this particular piece, I thought of as a problem for which alternative solutions had to be invented: ``In our joint project we will attempt to avoid the kind of binary oppositions that require a clean control signal path (such as the pressing of a pedal) in the design of the interactive system''.frisk-ost06 The foot pedal in this context is nothing more than a (non-musical) instrument to control the computer part.

In the theoretical realm the problem is the attempt to combine two radically different classes of information flow: one binary (pedal up/pedal down) and one continuous (primarily sound). The nature of the perceived response is opposite in quality to the nature of the stimulus.

Yet, as music the piece works well, Stefan has performed this version of the piece in Hanoi, Beijing, Malmo, Palo Alto, Seattle and Birmingham. and I am pleased with the way the electronic sounds integrate with the guitar part. Perhaps in this piece the human-human interaction taking place in preparation for the project and Stefan's involvement in the process of composition in a way substitute for the lack of real-time interaction? We are preparing a third version which will involve a more complex scheme of real-time interaction, not in order to prove the first version inferior (nor superior for that matter), but because it is in the nature of the piece to do several versions of it.

At the other end of the spectrum of my artistic work Repetition... features a (very) detailed score, and my solo work is entirely improvised; in Repetition... I do not perform any part, but in my solo work I perform every part, and so forth. lie my solo improvisations with computer---which on the map in []Figure * are placed almost in the middle but employ a large number of different techniques---and I primarily look to achieve two things. (i) Unity in sound (timbre) between the sounds produced acoustically and those produced electronically. This is not to say that I want the range of possible electronic sounds limited to saxophone sounds but that I look for a musical logic to the way the electronic sounds develop in relation to the saxophone sounds. []See the section on timbreMap for further discussion on unity and sonic interaction. See also the []chapter on interaction. (ii) A level of interaction that is not constrained to a control interface---close to how George Lewis described a performance of Voyager cited above (see Section *). I too would rather have the computer surprise me than always to follow me:








