Två problemställningar att undersöka i projektet1) Relationen mellan komposition/interpretation/improvisation Empiri baserad på interaktion under kompositionsarbetet mellan "musiker" och "tonsättare"Utifrån Nattiez modell för traditonell komposition (och improvisation)Jfr projekt med Ole och Love.Henrik: Förhandlingen mellan musikalisk idé idiomatikInterpretation blir ofta en process där en notbild som i sig är omöjlig att utföra "transkriberas" för instrumentets idiomatiska förutsättningarI tex fallet med Loves stycke utspelar sig denna process under själva kompositionsarbetet.2) Specifika ontologiska problemställningar i musik med instrument och elektronik, berör notation, interpretation, improvisation, komposition men framförallt möjligheten till interaktion mellan interpret och den elektroakustiska musiken. Tex rörande plasticitet, dynamik, alltså de fundamentala komponenter som står till interpretens förfogande i rent instrumental musik.Diffusion som en del av tolkningen (paper på NMK 2004 om detta)Former för fixering av ett "verk" konventionell notation eller fixerade elektroakustiska material som relateras till improvisation på instrumentet. Jfr problemen med  Loves improviserade partier.Artikel till ISME 2006Baseras på "1)"Utgångspunkter: TeoriBegreppen interpretation, improvisation, verkbegreppetNattiez/semiologi Poietic/EsthesicEmpiri: Love Mangs: VikenMain Contribution:In this paper we attempt to widen the concepts of composition and interpretation by way of deliberately fusing the two activities as studied in the collaboration between Östersjö and composer Love Mangs.  An important matter in this context is whether the object of interpretation can be reduced to non-sounding form (as is suggested by Roman Ingarden) or if there are reasons to regard music as sound as an inseperable part of the work? Can musical form be separated from the temporal factor - which is inevitable in performance? Ricoeur discusses the temporal aspect within literature and the problem with certain methods of analysis developed within structuralism in a way that can be transferred to music. Since a narrative is not made up of isolated events but on the contrary forms a coherent totality out of these discrete elements, the analytical approach to the narrative has to find a different method of analysis."The extension of the semiotic model to the narrative is the source of the general tendency of structural analysis to "de-chronologise the narrative, that is to reduce its temporal aspects to underlying formal properties." (Ricoeur: Hermeunetics and the Human Sciences) 1981The possibility to study structural elements in a score outside of the temporal manifestation as music is on the one hand one of the most important advantages that most of all has affected the development of polyphony and counterpoint in Western art music. On the other hand it is an approach in deep conflict with the very nature of the music as sound, indeed perhaps even more problematic than in the case of literature:"But elements in the narrative such as delay, detour, suspense, surprise, the possibility of alternatives etc are elements that cannot be absorbed into an achronic reading of the narrative, and yet it is, according to Ricoeur, "this irreducible chronological factor which narrativises the plot itself"(Jens Hesselager: "Sound and Sense" 2001)The possibility to examine structural elements outside of time is apparently an asset and yet it inhibits a satisfactory understanding of the work of music.  "...when the temporal process of a piece is turned into a quasi-geographical figure, it can be measured, proportions can be judged, a "centre" may be located and repetitions on either side of this centre may be interpreted as symmetrical patterns. (...) What was inaudible is made visible while what was audible is made inaccesible, silensed. In this sense, formal analysis can claim to grasp works on a deep level, i. e. below the surface, behind appearances."(Jens Hesselager: "Sound and Sense" 2001)Performance practice, interpretation and complexity in musicMusical interpretation is today an extremely complex artistic activity. The parallel activities of the early music movement, with its focus on historic performance practice, and the classical mainstream indulging in its own conservatoire traditions could seem to make things complicated enough. But considering also the multiplicity of musical cultures and traditions available to the performer and listener from all over the globe and also the continuous production of new music, the multiple difficulties facing a performer today is certainly of a different magnitude than it can ever have been before. This should according to my belief not be regarded only as positive scenario but also as a possible reason to the critical state of musical interpretation today.Complexity in music is very often discussed as a matter of complexity in notational procedures. This should certainly not be disposed of as uncontroversial because music can be regarded primarily as a sounding art form with notation as a secondary category. However, the history of Western music shows a constantly increasing focus on the notation in the score, a fact with many different implications for the art form as such. The development of notation gives us notions such as that of the composer, the work, performance interpretation, performance practice and a powerful interplay between these forces in the course of time. Some aspects of complexity in notation as well as in music have had an important impact on performative interpretation in music today, making it quite an urgent subject for reflection. For good and for bad, notation plays an equally crucial role in art music today, as does the written word in modern society. This is one of the main points of departure in British composer Trevor Wishart's stimulating and provocative "On Sonic Art" dealing with electroacoustic music in a wider sociological and aesthetic context. The heart of the matter is Wishart's assumption that notation not only reflects but actually creates the priorities that are crucial in the system. And the priorities in traditional notation are the categories of pitch and duration, as suggested in many philosopher's writings on music - such as Nelson Goodman and Peter Kivy, but surprisingly enough even by composers such as Pierre Boulez!"The split in conception between what are seen as primary and secondary aspects of musical organisation leads to a split between composer and performer (...) What takes place is not merely a focusing of our perception upon the notatable and the consequent feedback upon our musical praxis, but a reorientation of our conception of music. (...) Just as the immediate dialectic of speech had been fundamentally subverted and devalued by the permanent monologues of the written word, so an intuitive and unverbalisable knowledge of music as an immediate dialectic of musical action and the fleeting and unscrutable musical experience was to be fundamentally challenged by the permanence and scrutability of the score. Permanently available and amenable to rationalistic verbal explication, the score rapidly usurps the sound experience of music as the focus of verbal attention and becomes the keystone of an eminently verbalisable conception of what music "is".   The most obvious consequence of the discovery of analytic notation is the emergence of the "composer", who is able to challenge and expand existing musical praxis through creating notations of novel musical activities, his original scores. The novel split which gradually emerges between composer and performer, between a score and its "interpretation" is the concrete realisation in musical praxis of the perceptual focusing upon notatable parameters". (Trevor Wishart: On Sonic Art p 21)One can easily trace an historic tendency towards increasing precision in notation throughout the history of Western Art Music: In the early Middle Ages, notation had more of a mnemonic function, where first pitch and then later rhythm was more and more precisely specified. With mensural notation the new demands for polyphonic writing was made feasible. In the 17th century bar lines, expression signs, and indications for tempo and dynamics came into use. Diminuendos and crescendos began to appear during the classical period along with the increasing use of expression marks. With the invention of the metronome Beethoven was able to indicate precise tempos and at the high point of romanticism we reach the first peak of the prominence of the composers notation and intentions for performance. But not even this is the end point of this evolution, which continues up to the total serialism of the late 1950's and 60's where every parameter of the musical object is notated and subject to serial permutation. The performer is at this point of this evolutionary chain reduced to a means for the production of sounding musical objects, and could perhaps be regarded as being excluded from the artistic process. This would leave this process of emancipation of the performer as interpreter (and not being creator or co-creator of the work) of a musical work full circle, finally making the performer artistically dispensable. Electronic music then could be regarded as the definite ending point where both notation and performer are dispensed with, again making art music an autographic art.This rather pessimistic viewpoint has close connections to the philosophy of both Adorno as well as Max Weber, relating this situation to the general process of rationalisation of Western Culture, in which musical production is transformed into a calculable affair operating with known means, effective instruments, and understandable rules. The development of rational structures in Western music is related to the Enzauberung (disenchantment) of the world resulting from the world of ideas of the Enlightenment. One of the most insidious counterparts to this writing of history is launched by Umberto Eco in his "L'Opera Aperta" (The Open Work) where he sketches the completely opposite historical account. Here the scope for a multiplicity of interpretations is seen to be gradually increasing from the Middle Ages up to our time. This progression from the theory of allegory allowing the reader in the middle ages a total of four different interpretations in reading the Scriptures: Apart from the literal sense there was also the moral, the allegoric and the anagogical sense. Obviously this is a limited form of openness where interpretation is rigidly predetermined and the choice for the reader is which kind of interpretation to apply in a certain reading. "The laws governing textual interpretation are the laws of an authoritarian regime which guide the individual in his every action, prescribing the ends for him and offering him the means to attain them."(Eco: The Open Work, p 6-7)Eco continues with examples from the openness of baroque architecture, allowing for an infinitude of different viewpoints, to the notion of "pure poetry" in pre-romantic and romantic poetry, but he locates the first conscious poetics of the open work to the symbolism of the late 19th Century. He continues with referring to the works of MallarmŽ, Kafka and Joyce, but interestingly enough, Eco's main focus of interest is on the open form in works of Berio, Pousseur, Boulez and Stockhausen of the fifties and sixties. In these works... "the auditor is required to do some of this organizing and structuring of the musical discourse. He collaborates with the composer in making the composition."The reasons to this progression are, according to Eco, to be found in the changing ways with which science or contemporary culture views reality. The hierarchic structure of the medieval world view is clearly represented in the closed conception of fixed allegoric forms. The dynamic openness in the baroque is directly related to the changes in scientific awareness. By giving up the notion of a single viewing point, baroque architecture mirrors the Copernican world view. What also comes to the fore is a new subjectivity, shifting the attention from the essence to the appearance, to the psychology of impression and sensation. The radical openness in the music of the Darmstadt school is then for obvious reasons associated with the landmarks in modern science, one aspect being the perceptive ambiguities discussed in modern psychology and phenomenology. "The multiple polarity of a serial composition in music, where the listener is not faced by an absolute conditioning center of reference, requires him to constitute his own system of auditory relationships. (...) Now this multiple polarity is extremely close to the spatiotemporal conception of the universe which we owe to Einstein. (...) In this kind of universe, relativity means the infinite variabilitiy of experience as well as the infinite multiplication of possible ways of measuring things and viewing their position." (Eco p.18)But Eco also makes use of Information Theory as a tool for understanding the relation between information and meaning, and more explicitly as a means for understanding the relation between the complex textures of serial music and the poetics of the open work. Information is directly proportional to unpredictability and must be clearly distinguished from meaning. As the amount of information is greater the possible interpretations from a listeners point of view are strongly increased in a serial piece of music as compared to tonal music. "Somebody listening to a work by Webern freely reorganises and enjoys a series of interrelations inside the context of the sound system offered to him in that particular (already fully produced) composition."But complexity as we find it here as understood from information theory as a device for creating a multiplicity of interpretational possibilities seems to be mirrored in a simultaneous process increasing control executed by the composer. The paradoxical with the music of the Darmstadt School is to be found in the parallel upgrowth of serial music and the aleatoric procedures, and mobile and open forms that are the point of departure for Eco's account. Perhaps there is a possibility for an alternative interpretation of the history of notational progress in these simultaneous tendencies towards complete control and hitherto unimaginable freedom of interpretation?A culmination in the vital dialectics between extreme precision, even beyond rational control of the performer or listener, multiplicity of interpretational possibilities and the performers labour to make an authentic realisation of the score is to be found in the works of British composer Brian Ferneyhough. The complex relation between the score as abstraction, as numb artefact, vis-‡-vis the performers artistically independent solutions and strategies becomes a creative and provocative contribution to the discourse on performance practice and interpretation today. As put by Ferneyhough in an interview with Philippe Albra:"But my point is: what is interpretation? If you "interpret" a Beethoven sonata you don't play exactly what is notated on the page in front of your nose. In a certain sense you are interpreting an entire tradition of interpretation already several generations removed from the original, and any innovation you introduce is counterpointed against this background. The perfect case in point would be the Webern variations. One tradition has it that you play what's on the page, that is, without pedal. Another tradition has it that the composer himself reinterpreted the written page liberally, adding pedal and rubato according to what he felt was the sense of the music - that is, making clear the position occupied by the piece against a silently assumed aesthetic background. This sort of background is today either lacking completely or is present in the negative sense of a performer undifferintiatedly applying his conservatoire technique, learned via Viotti, Tchaikovsky etc., to whatever contemporary pieces happen to cross his path. Although some composers may, I suppose, actually compose their pieces with that contingency in mind, I cannot say that I find it a very attractive state of affairs. The fractured, disassociated stylistic panorama facing a performer today simply does not allow the performer a great deal of opportunity to plunge into the interpretational implications and subtleties of nuance of each and every composer's native dialect; it is really up to the composer, then, to gently suggest, via the relation of his notation to perceived content, form or executive difficulty, what sort of practical interpretational deviation from this particular norm might be most fruitful. (Ferneyhough: Collected writings p 318-319)The process of alienation between composer and performer certainly started getting problematic with the upgrowth of musical modernism. Ferneyhough's reference to this problem with performer putting a "screen" of conservatoire performance practice over their reading of a contemporary score is one important side of the coin. The other, and also a critical factor, is the decreasing artistic freedom emanating from the increase of minute detail in notation. But the density of interpretative signs in a typical new complexity notation is created with the intention to find a creative solution to the crisis in the contemporary situation of dissasociation between performer and composer.   (...) after having worked on the technique and the sense of the piece simultaneously, the player comes to accept that a great deal of personal creative freedom of approach and realization is implied that could not have been suggested in any other way. A notation which specifically and programmatically deconstructs the sound into its subcomponents sensibilizes the mind towards aspects of the work which a seemingly more straightforward image would not be in a position to do. The performer recreates the work in his own image, not according to some arbitrary process of homogenization via the academy.(Ferneyhough: Collected writings p 318-319).In the time of the Second Vienesse school there was a close relation between these composers and some specialised performers such as the Kolisch quartet. But this close collaboration does not focus on performance practical aspects or the close artistic exchange between the composer and the performer. The fundamental issues are that all important information was to be found in the score and that an interpretation of a score had to go much further than an ordinary structural analysis. As the violinist Rudolf Kolisch puts it:"It has to penetrate so deeply, that we are finally able to retrace every thought process of the composer. Only such a thorough examination will enable us to read the signs to their full extent and meaning and to define the objective performance elements, especially those referring to phrasing, punctuation and inflection, the speech-like elements."There are several reasons to the distrust in performers interpretations that became more common (of course this has always been a matter of anecdotes even since the time of Josquin Desprez!) in the 1950s and 60s, on the one side mainly due to the immanent forces in music already mentioned but also due to the problem of performers putting a romantic screen in their reading of the score..The way it is put by Kolisch, there seems to remain nothing but the text to musical performance. Obviously this is not the only possible view of performance of the music of Webern and Schoenberg, given the example stated by Ferneyhough above. Surprisingly uncontroversial today is the elevated status of the composer, emanating from the Beethoven cult in the 19th century which paradoxically enough has not received any backlash either by modernism or postmodernism during the 20th century. The field of tension between authenticity in a performance emanating from the composer's intentions as expressed in the score and the personal authenticity of the performer is likely to be stronger today than ever before.  The solution suggested by new complexity creates what cold be termed "negative freedom" in the choice of a feasible solution to partly impossible demands in the notation. The choice open to the performer is then not really what you wish to bring out but rather what you have to omit of the notation in a specific performance."In Cassandra's Dream Song (1970) the material has been intentionally so slanted as to present, at times, a literally "unplayable" image. The boundary separating the playable from the unplayable has not been defined by resorting to pitches lying outside of the range of the flute, or other equally obvious subterfuges, but has been left undefined, depending for its precise location on the specific abilities of the individual performer, whose interpretational endowment forms a relativizing "filter". In the introductory notes I wrote, at the time: "...the audible (and visual) degree of difficulty is to be drawn, as an integral structural element, into the fabric of the composition itself."(Ferneyhough: Collected writings p 5)One of the most important differences in approach between the Darmstadt school and the new complexity movement is the focus on the performer and on the tactile and gestalt qualities of performance. The energy created in most performances of a Ferneyhough score is not very distant to the artistic aura of a virtuoso free improvisation. A good closing point in this subject then could be this quote by Ferneyhough:"... no compositional style can achieve full validity which does not take as its point of departure that symbiosis between the performer and his instrument in all its imperfection, from which the life force of music emanates."(Ferneyhough: Collected writings p 99)