
Negotiating the Musical Work
An empirical study on the inter-relation between composition,
interpretation and performance.

Henrik Frisk, henrik.frisk@mhm.lu.se, composer, PhD candidate, Malmö
Academy of Music
Stefan Östersjö, stefan_ostersjo@hotmail.com, guitarist, PhD candidate,
Malmö Academy of Music

Abstract

In this paper we intend to explore the inter-relations between performer
and composer, in the form of a theoretical study, which is intended to lay
the ground for a new work for guitar and computer by Henrik Frisk for
Stefan Östersjö. This project is part of our respective artistic research
projects at the Malmö Academy of Music.

From a hermeneutic point of view, performance interpretation of music is a
special case (Levinson 1993, Davies 2001, Stecker 2003). A close
collaboration between a living composer and a performer, allows for
discussions on the rendering of the notation. We find that this process
could be described as a negotiation towards a version of the work (Kivy
1995) and that this can serve as a model for understanding similar
processes even prior to the existence of any notated material. This article
aims at a closer understanding of the significance of these negotiations
and, further, to create a broader platform for reflection on and analysis
of our respective artistic practices.

We approach this complex area empirically by analyzing selections of the
video documentation of Östersjö's collaboration with composer Love Mangs,
as well as versions of a certain passage in a piece for harp and computer
by Henrik Frisk. In the video material we find striking examples of how the
traditional roles of "composer" and "performer" are exchanged, indicative
of the difficulty to establish fixity in the definition of these seemingly
discrete artistic fields. Following Stecker (2003) we would like to suggest
that there is always an element of construction in a performance of a piece
of music, but we also find that there are elements of interpretation in the
act of composition. By using Molino's and Nattiez' terminology for a
semiological analysis of music we attempt at describing the interplay in
terms of poietic and esthesic processes (Molino 1990, Nattiez 1990).

References
Davies, S (2001) Musical Works and Performances Oxford : Clarendon Press
Kivy, P: (1995) Authenticities.  Cornell University Press
Levinson. G (1993) 'Performative vs. Critical Interpretation of Music' in
Krausz, M: The Interpretation of Music: Philosophical Essays, Oxford :
Clarendon Press
Molino, J (1990): Musical Fact and the Semiology of Music, Music Analysis
9:2 pp 113-156, Blackwell Publishing
Nattiez, JJ (1990): Music and Discourse: toward a semiology of music,
Princeton University Press
Stecker, R. (2003) "Interpretation and Construction" Blackwell Publishing

